### Continuous Integration

Once a Bounded Context has been defined, we must keep it sound. When a number of people are working in the same Bounded Context, there is a strong tendency for the model to fragment. The bigger the team, the bigger the problem, but as few as three or four people can encounter serious problems. However, breaking down the system into ever-smaller contexts eventually loses a valuable level of integration and coherency.

Even when a team works in a Bounded Context there is room for error. We need to communicate inside the team to make sure we all understand the role played by each element in the model. If one does not understand the relationships between objects, they may modify the code in such a way that comes in contradiction with the original intent. It is easy to make such a mistake when we do not keep 100% focus on the purity of the model. One member of the team might add code which duplicates existing code without knowing it, or they might add duplicate code instead of changing the current code, afraid of breaking existing functionality.

A model is not fully defined from the beginning. It is created, then it evolves continuously based on new insight in the domain and feedback from the development process. That means that new concepts may enter the model, and new elements are added to the code. All these need are to be integrated into one unified model, and implemented accordingly in code. That’s why Continuous Integration is a necessary process within a Bounded Context. We need a process of integration to make sure that all the new elements which are added fit harmoniously into the rest of the model, and are implemented correctly in code. We need to have a procedure used to merge the code. The sooner we merge the code the better. For a single small team, daily merges are recommended. We also need to have a build process in place. The merged code needs to be automatically built so it can be tested. Another necessary requirement is to perform automated tests. If the team has a test tool, and has created a test suite, the test can be run upon each build, and any errors are signaled. The code can be easily changed to fix the reported errors, because they are caught early, and the merge, build, and test process is started again.

Continuous Integration is based on integration of concepts in the model, then finding its way into the implementation where it is tested. Any inconsistency of the model can be spotted in the implementation. Continuous Integration applies to a Bounded Context, it is not used to deal with relationships between neighboring Contexts.