### Separate Ways

So far we have tried to find ways to integrate subsystems, make them work together, and do it in such a way that would keep the model and the design sound. This requires effort and compromise. Teams that work on the respective subsystems need to spend considerable time to iron out the relationships between the subsystems. They may need to do constant merging of their code, and perform tests to make sure they have not broken anything. Sometimes, one of the team needs to spend considerable time just to implement some requirements which are needed by the other team. There are also compromises to be made. It’s one thing to develop independently, to choose the concepts and associations freely, and another thing to make sure that your model fits into the framework of another system. We may need to alter the model just to make it work with the other subsystem. Or we may need to introduce special layers which perform translations between the two subsystems. There are times when we have to do that, but there are times when we can go a different path. We need to closely evaluate the benefits of integration and use it only if there is real value in doing so. If we reach the conclusion that integration is more trouble than it is worth, then we should go the Separate Ways.

The Separate Ways pattern addresses the case when an enterprise application can be made up of several smaller applications which have little or nothing in common from a modeling perspective. There is a single set of requirements, and from the user’s perspective this is one application, but from a modeling and design point of view it may done using separate models with distinct implementations. We should look at the requirements and see if they can be divided in two or more sets which do not have much in common. If that can be done, then we can create separate Bounded Contexts and do the modeling independently. This has the advantage of having the freedom to choose the technologies used for implementation. The applications we are creating may share a common thin GUI which acts as a portal with links or buttons used to access each application. That is a minor integration which has to do with organizing the applications, rather than the model behind them.

Before going on Separate Ways we need to make sure that we won’t be coming back to an integrated system. Models developed independently are very difficult to integrate. They have so little in common that it is just not worth doing it.